Reference Type:  Journal Article
Record Number: 2365
Author: Hall, A., Munoz-Ruiz, M., Mattila, J., Koikkalainen, J., Tsolaki, M., Mecocci, P., Kloszewska, I., Vellas, B., Lovestone, S., Visser, P. J., Lotjonen, J., Soininen, H., Alzheimer Disease Neuroimaging, Initiative, AddNeuroMed, consortium, Descripa and Kuopio, L. Mci
Year: 2015
Title: Generalizability of the disease state index prediction model for identifying patients progressing from mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer's disease
Journal: J Alzheimers Dis
Volume: 44
Issue: 1
Pages: 79-92
Short Title: Generalizability of the disease state index prediction model for identifying patients progressing from mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer's disease
Alternate Journal: Journal of Alzheimer's disease : JAD
ISSN: 1875-8908 (Electronic)
1387-2877 (Linking)
DOI: 10.3233/JAD-140942
Accession Number: 25201784
Abstract: BACKGROUND: The Disease State Index (DSI) prediction model measures the similarity of patient data to diagnosed stable and progressive mild cognitive impairment (MCI) cases to identify patients who are progressing to Alzheimer's disease. OBJECTIVES: We evaluated how well the DSI generalizes across four different cohorts: DESCRIPA, ADNI, AddNeuroMed, and the Kuopio MCI study. METHODS: The accuracy of the DSI in predicting progression was examined for each cohort separately using 10 x 10-fold cross-validation and for inter-cohort validation using each cohort as a test set for the model built from the other independent cohorts using bootstrapping with 10 repetitions. Altogether 875 subjects were included in the analysis. The analyzed data included a comprehensive set of age and gender corrected magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) features from hippocampal volumetry, multi-template tensor-based morphometry, and voxel-based morphometry as well as Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), APOE genotype, and additional cohort specific data from neuropsychological tests and cerebrospinal fluid measurements (CSF). RESULTS: The DSI model was used to classify the patients into stable and progressive MCI cases. AddNeuroMed had the highest classification results of the cohorts, while ADNI and Kuopio MCI exhibited the lowest values. The MRI features alone achieved a good classification performance for all cohorts. For ADNI and DESCRIPA, adding MMSE, APOE genotype, CSF, and neuropsychological data improved the results. CONCLUSIONS: The results reveal that the prediction performance of the combined cohort is close to the average of the individual cohorts. It is feasible to use different cohorts as training sets for the DSI, if they are sufficiently similar.
Notes: Hall, Anette
Munoz-Ruiz, Miguel
Mattila, Jussi
Koikkalainen, Juha
Tsolaki, Magda
Mecocci, Patrizia
Kloszewska, Iwona
Vellas, Bruno
Lovestone, Simon
Visser, Pieter Jelle
Lotjonen, Jyrki
Soininen, Hilkka
eng
U01 AG024904/AG/NIA NIH HHS/
Canadian Institutes of Health Research/Canada
Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
Netherlands
2014/09/10 06:00
J Alzheimers Dis. 2015;44(1):79-92. doi: 10.3233/JAD-140942.
URL: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25201784
Author Address: Institute of Clinical Medicine, Neurology, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland.
Institute of Clinical Medicine, Neurology, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland Department of Neurology, Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, Finland.
VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, Tampere, Finland.
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Memory and Dementia Centre, "G Papanicolaou" General Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece.
Institute of Gerontology and Geriatrics, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.
Medical University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland.
UMR INSERM, University of Toulouse, France.
National Institute for Health Research (NIHR), London, UK King's College London, Institute of Psychiatry, London, UK.
VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands.


