Reference Type:  Journal Article
Record Number: 2316
Author: Roussotte, F. F., Gutman, B. A., Hibar, D. P., Madsen, S. K., Narr, K. L., Thompson, P. M. and Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging, Initiative
Year: 2014
Title: Carriers of a common variant in the dopamine transporter gene have greater dementia risk, cognitive decline, and faster ventricular expansion
Journal: Alzheimers Dement
Date: Dec 10
Short Title: Carriers of a common variant in the dopamine transporter gene have greater dementia risk, cognitive decline, and faster ventricular expansion
Alternate Journal: Alzheimer's & dementia : the journal of the Alzheimer's Association
ISSN: 1552-5279 (Electronic)
1552-5260 (Linking)
DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2014.10.011
Accession Number: 25496873
Abstract: BACKGROUND: Genetic variants in DAT1, the gene encoding the dopamine transporter (DAT) protein, have been implicated in many brain disorders. In a recent case-control study of Alzheimer's disease (AD), a regulatory polymorphism in DAT1 showed a significant association with the clinical stages of dementia. METHODS: We tested whether this variant was associated with increased AD risk, and with measures of cognitive decline and longitudinal ventricular expansion, in a large sample of elderly participants with genetic, neurocognitive, and neuroimaging data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative. RESULTS: The minor allele-previously linked with increased DAT expression in vitro-was more common in AD patients than in both individuals with mild cognitive impairment and healthy elderly controls. The same allele was also associated with poorer cognitive performance and faster ventricular expansion, independently of diagnosis. CONCLUSION: These results may be due to reduced dopaminergic transmission in carriers of the DAT1 mutation.
Notes: Roussotte, Florence F
Gutman, Boris A
Hibar, Derrek P
Madsen, Sarah K
Narr, Katherine L
Thompson, Paul M
(ADNI)
ENG
2014/12/17 06:00
Alzheimers Dement. 2014 Dec 10. pii: S1552-5260(14)02866-0. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2014.10.011.
URL: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25496873
Author Address: Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA; Imaging Genetics Center, Institute for Neuroimaging and Informatics, Department of Neurology, Keck/USC School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
Imaging Genetics Center, Institute for Neuroimaging and Informatics, Department of Neurology, Keck/USC School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA; Department of Psychiatry, Semel Institute for Neuroscience and Human Behavior, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA; Imaging Genetics Center, Institute for Neuroimaging and Informatics, Department of Neurology, Keck/USC School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA; Department of Psychiatry, Semel Institute for Neuroscience and Human Behavior, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA; Departments of Psychiatry, Engineering, Radiology, & Ophthalmology, Keck/USC School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. Electronic address: pthomp@usc.edu.


