Reference Type:  Journal Article
Record Number: 2036
Author: Weiner, M. W., Veitch, D. P., Hayes, J., Neylan, T., Grafman, J., Aisen, P. S., Petersen, R. C., Jack, C., Jagust, W., Trojanowski, J. Q., Shaw, L. M., Saykin, A. J., Green, R. C., Harvey, D., Toga, A. W., Friedl, K. E., Pacifico, A., Sheline, Y., Yaffe, K., Mohlenoff, B. and Department of Defense Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging, Initiative
Year: 2014
Title: Effects of traumatic brain injury and posttraumatic stress disorder on Alzheimer's disease in veterans, using the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative
Journal: Alzheimers Dement
Volume: 10
Issue: 3 Suppl
Pages: S226-35
Date: Jun
Short Title: Effects of traumatic brain injury and posttraumatic stress disorder on Alzheimer's disease in veterans, using the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative
Alternate Journal: Alzheimer's & dementia : the journal of the Alzheimer's Association
ISSN: 1552-5279 (Electronic)
1552-5260 (Linking)
DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2014.04.005
Accession Number: 24924673
Abstract: Both traumatic brain injury (TBI) and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) are common problems resulting from military service, and both have been associated with increased risk of cognitive decline and dementia resulting from Alzheimer's disease (AD) or other causes. This study aims to use imaging techniques and biomarker analysis to determine whether traumatic brain injury (TBI) and/or PTSD resulting from combat or other traumas increase the risk for AD and decrease cognitive reserve in Veteran subjects, after accounting for age. Using military and Department of Veterans Affairs records, 65 Vietnam War veterans with a history of moderate or severe TBI with or without PTSD, 65 with ongoing PTSD without TBI, and 65 control subjects are being enrolled in this study at 19 sites. The study aims to select subject groups that are comparable in age, gender, ethnicity, and education. Subjects with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) or dementia are being excluded. However, a new study just beginning, and similar in size, will study subjects with TBI, subjects with PTSD, and control subjects with MCI. Baseline measurements of cognition, function, blood, and cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers; magnetic resonance images (structural, diffusion tensor, and resting state blood-level oxygen dependent (BOLD) functional magnetic resonance imaging); and amyloid positron emission tomographic (PET) images with florbetapir are being obtained. One-year follow-up measurements will be collected for most of the baseline procedures, with the exception of the lumbar puncture, the PET imaging, and apolipoprotein E genotyping. To date, 19 subjects with TBI only, 46 with PTSD only, and 15 with TBI and PTSD have been recruited and referred to 13 clinics to undergo the study protocol. It is expected that cohorts will be fully recruited by October 2014. This study is a first step toward the design and statistical powering of an AD prevention trial using at-risk veterans as subjects, and provides the basis for a larger, more comprehensive study of dementia risk factors in veterans.
Notes: Weiner, Michael W
Veitch, Dallas P
Hayes, Jacqueline
Neylan, Thomas
Grafman, Jordan
Aisen, Paul S
Petersen, Ronald C
Jack, Clifford
Jagust, William
Trojanowski, John Q
Shaw, Leslie M
Saykin, Andrew J
Green, Robert C
Harvey, Danielle
Toga, Arthur W
Friedl, Karl E
Pacifico, Anthony
Sheline, Yvette
Yaffe, Kristine
Mohlenoff, Brian
eng
Canadian Institutes of Health Research/Canada
Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
2014/06/14 06:00
Alzheimers Dement. 2014 Jun;10(3 Suppl):S226-35. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2014.04.005.
URL: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24924673
Author Address: Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Center for Imaging of Neurodegenerative Diseases, San Francisco, CA, USA; Department of Radiology, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA; Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA; Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA; Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA. Electronic address: michael.weiner@ucsf.edu.
Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Center for Imaging of Neurodegenerative Diseases, San Francisco, CA, USA.
Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
Department of Psychiatry, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA.
Department of Neurosciences, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA.
Institute on Aging, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Alzheimer's Disease Core Center, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Udall Parkinson's Research Center, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Center for Neurodegenerative Research, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA; Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
Division of Biostatistics, Department of Public Health Sciences, University of California, Davis, CA, USA.
Laboratory of Neuroimaging, Institute of Neuroimaging and Informatics, University of Southern California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
Telemedicine and Advanced Technology Research Center, U.S. Army Medical Research and Materiel Command, Fort Detrick, MD, USA.
Department of Psychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine, Washington University, St. Louis, MO, USA.
Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA; Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.


