Reference Type:  Journal Article
Record Number: 298
Author: Hibar, D. P., Stein, J. L., Kohannim, O., Jahanshad, N., Jack, C. R., Weiner, M. W., Toga, A. W. and Thompson, P. M.
Year: 2011
Title: Principal components regression: Multivariate, gene-based tests in imaging genomics
Journal: Biomedical Imaging: From Nano to Macro, 2011 IEEE International Symposium on
Pages: 289-293
Date: March 30 2011-April 2 2011
Short Title: Principal components regression: Multivariate, gene-based tests in imaging genomics
Alternate Journal: Biomedical Imaging: From Nano to Macro, 2011 IEEE International Symposium on
ISSN: 1945-7928
DOI: 10.1109/isbi.2011.5872408
Keywords: biomedical MRI
brain
diseases
genetics
genomics
neurophysiology
polymorphism
principal component analysis
regression analysis
ADNI
Alzheimer Disease Neuroimaging Initiative
brain structure
gene-based tests
imaging genomics
multiple single nucleotide polymorphisms
multivariate statistics
principal components regression
tensor-based morphometry analysis
Abstract: In imaging genomics, there have been rapid advances in genome-wide, image-wide searches for genes that influence brain structure. Most efforts focus on univariate tests that treat each genetic variation independently, ignoring the joint effects of multiple variants. Instead, we present a gene-based method to detect the joint effect of multiple single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 18,044 genes across 31,662 voxels of the whole brain in a tensor-based morphometry analysis of baseline MRI scans from 731 subjects from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). Our gene-based multivariate statistics use principal components regression to test the combined effect of multiple genetic variants on an image, using a single test statistic. In some situations, which we describe, this can boost power by encoding population variations within each gene, reducing the effective number of statistical tests, and reducing the effect dimension of the search space. Multivariate gene-based methods may discover gene effects undetectable with standard, univariate methods, accelerating ongoing imaging genomics efforts worldwide.


