Reference Type:  Journal Article
Record Number: 2122
Author: Roussotte, F. F., Gutman, B. A., Hibar, D. P., Jahanshad, N., Madsen, S. K., Jack, C. R., Jr., Weiner, M. W., Thompson, P. M. and Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging, Initiative
Year: 2013
Title: A single nucleotide polymorphism associated with reduced alcohol intake in the RASGRF2 gene predicts larger cortical volumes but faster longitudinal ventricular expansion in the elderly
Journal: Front Aging Neurosci
Volume: 5
Pages: 93
Short Title: A single nucleotide polymorphism associated with reduced alcohol intake in the RASGRF2 gene predicts larger cortical volumes but faster longitudinal ventricular expansion in the elderly
Alternate Journal: Frontiers in aging neuroscience
ISSN: 1663-4365 (Electronic)
1663-4365 (Linking)
DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2013.00093
PMCID: 3867747
Accession Number: 24409144
Abstract: A recent genome-wide association meta-analysis showed a suggestive association between alcohol intake in humans and a common single nucleotide polymorphism in the ras-specific guanine nucleotide releasing factor 2 gene. Here, we tested whether this variant - associated with lower alcohol consumption - showed associations with brain structure and longitudinal ventricular expansion over time, across two independent elderly cohorts, totaling 1,032 subjects. We first examined a large sample of 738 elderly participants with neuroimaging and genetic data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI1). Then, we assessed the generalizability of the findings by testing this polymorphism in a replication sample of 294 elderly subjects from a continuation of the first ADNI project (ADNI2) to minimize the risk of reporting false positive results. The minor allele - previously linked with lower alcohol intake - was associated with larger volumes in various cortical regions, notably the medial prefrontal cortex and cingulate gyrus in both cohorts. Intriguingly, the same allele also predicted faster ventricular expansion rates in the ADNI1 cohort at 1- and 2-year follow up. Despite a lack of alcohol consumption data in this study cohort, these findings, combined with earlier functional imaging investigations of the same gene, suggest the existence of reciprocal interactions between genes, brain, and drinking behavior.
Notes: Roussotte, Florence F
Gutman, Boris A
Hibar, Derrek P
Jahanshad, Neda
Madsen, Sarah K
Jack, Clifford R Jr
Weiner, Michael W
Thompson, Paul M
(ADNI)
eng
Switzerland
2014/01/11 06:00
Front Aging Neurosci. 2013 Dec 19;5:93. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2013.00093. eCollection 2013.
URL: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24409144
Author Address: Imaging Genetics Center, University of Southern California Los Angeles, CA, USA ; Departments of Neurology and Psychiatry, David Geffen School of Medicine at University of California Los Angeles Los Angeles, CA, USA.
Imaging Genetics Center, University of Southern California Los Angeles, CA, USA.
Mayo Clinic Rochester, MN, USA.
Departments of Radiology, Medicine, Psychiatry, University of California San Francisco San Francisco, CA, USA ; Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center San Francisco, CA, USA.
Imaging Genetics Center, University of Southern California Los Angeles, CA, USA ; Departments of Neurology and Psychiatry, David Geffen School of Medicine at University of California Los Angeles Los Angeles, CA, USA ; Departments of Neurology, Psychiatry, Pediatrics, Engineering, Radiology, and Ophthalmology, Keck University of Southern California School of Medicine, University of Southern California , Los Angeles, CA, USA.


