Reference Type:  Journal Article
Record Number: 2336
Author: Mattsson, N., Insel, P. S., Donohue, M., Landau, S., Jagust, W. J., Shaw, L. M., Trojanowski, J. Q., Zetterberg, H., Blennow, K., Weiner, M. W. and for the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging, Initiative
Year: 2014
Title: Independent information from cerebrospinal fluid amyloid-beta and florbetapir imaging in Alzheimer's disease
Journal: Brain
Date: Dec 24
Short Title: Independent information from cerebrospinal fluid amyloid-beta and florbetapir imaging in Alzheimer's disease
Alternate Journal: Brain : a journal of neurology
ISSN: 1460-2156 (Electronic)
0006-8950 (Linking)
DOI: 10.1093/brain/awu367
Accession Number: 25541191
Abstract: Reduced cerebrospinal fluid amyloid-beta42 and increased retention of florbetapir positron emission tomography are biomarkers reflecting cortical amyloid load in Alzheimer's disease. However, these measurements do not always agree and may represent partly different aspects of the underlying Alzheimer's disease pathology. The goal of this study was therefore to test if cerebrospinal fluid and positron emission tomography amyloid-beta biomarkers are independently related to other Alzheimer's disease markers, and to examine individuals who are discordantly classified by these two biomarker modalities. Cerebrospinal fluid and positron emission tomography amyloid-beta were measured at baseline in 769 persons [161 healthy controls, 68 subjective memory complaints, 419 mild cognitive impairment and 121 Alzheimer's disease dementia, mean age 72 years (standard deviation 7 years), 47% females] and used to predict diagnosis, APOE epsilon4 carriage status, cerebral blood flow, cerebrospinal fluid total-tau and phosphorylated-tau levels (cross-sectionally); and hippocampal volume, fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography results and Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-cognitive subscale scores (longitudinally). Cerebrospinal fluid and positron emission tomography amyloid-beta were highly correlated, but adjusting one of these predictors for the other revealed that they both provided partially independent information when predicting diagnosis, APOE epsilon4, hippocampal volume, metabolism, cognition, total-tau and phosphorylated-tau (the 95% confidence intervals of the adjusted effects did not include zero). Cerebrospinal fluid amyloid-beta was more strongly related to APOE epsilon4 whereas positron emission tomography amyloid-beta was more strongly related to tau levels (P < 0.05). Discordance (mainly isolated cerebrospinal fluid amyloid-beta positivity) differed by diagnostic group (P < 0.001) and was seen in 21% of cognitively healthy people but only 6% in dementia patients. The finding that cerebrospinal fluid and positron emission tomography amyloid-beta provide partially independent information about a wide range of Alzheimer's measures supports the theory that these modalities represent partly different aspects of Alzheimer's pathology. The fact that mismatch, with positive cerebrospinal fluid amyloid-beta but normal positron emission tomography amyloid-beta, is relatively common in cognitively healthy people may be considered when using these biomarkers to identify early stage Alzheimer's disease. Reduced cerebrospinal fluid amyloid-beta may be more strongly related to early stage Alzheimer's disease, whereas increased positron emission tomography amyloid-beta may be more strongly related to disease progression.
Notes: Mattsson, Niklas
Insel, Philip S
Donohue, Michael
Landau, Susan
Jagust, William J
Shaw, Leslie M
Trojanowski, John Q
Zetterberg, Henrik
Blennow, Kaj
Weiner, Michael W
ENG
2014/12/30 06:00
Brain. 2014 Dec 24. pii: awu367.
URL: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25541191
Author Address: 1 Clinical Neurochemistry Laboratory, Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, the Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg, Molndal, Sweden 2 Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA 3 Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Centre, Centre for Imaging of Neurodegenerative Diseases, San Francisco, CA, USA niklas.mattsson@neuro.gu.se.
2 Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA 3 Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Centre, Centre for Imaging of Neurodegenerative Diseases, San Francisco, CA, USA.
4 Division of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Department of Family and Preventive Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
5 Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute and School of Public Health, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA.
6 Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Institute on Aging, Centre for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
1 Clinical Neurochemistry Laboratory, Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, the Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg, Molndal, Sweden 7 UCL Institute of Neurology, Queen Square, London WC1N 3BG, UK.
1 Clinical Neurochemistry Laboratory, Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, the Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg, Molndal, Sweden.


