Reference Type:  Conference Proceedings
Record Number: 310
Author: Kohannim, O., Hibar, D. P., Stein, J. L., Jahanshad, N., Jack, C. R., Weiner, M. W., Toga, A. W. and Thompson, P. M.
Year of Conference: 2011
Title: Boosting power to detect genetic associations in imaging using multi-locus, genome-wide scans and ridge regression
Conference Name: Biomedical Imaging: From Nano to Macro, 2011 IEEE International Symposium on
Pages: 1855-1859
Date: March 30 2011-April 2 2011
Short Title: Boosting power to detect genetic associations in imaging using multi-locus, genome-wide scans and ridge regression
ISBN: 1945-7928
DOI: 10.1109/isbi.2011.5872769
Keywords: biomedical MRI
diseases
genomics
neurophysiology
regression analysis
Alzheimer disease neuroimaging initiative
MRI-derived hippocampal measure
correlated single nucleotide polymorphisms
genetic associations
genome-wide association studies
multilocus genome-wide scans
post hoc tensor-based morphometry analyses
ridge regression
statistical effects
statistical tests
temporal lobe volume measure
temporal lobe volume phenotypes
univariate analysis
Abstract: Most algorithms used for imaging genetics examine statistical effects of each individual genetic variant, one at a time. We developed a new approach, based on ridge regression, to jointly evaluate multiple, correlated single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of brain images. Our goal was to boost the power to detect gene effects on brain images. We tested our method on MRI-derived hippocampal and temporal lobe volume measures, from 740 subjects scanned by the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). We identified two significant and one almost significant SNP for the hippocampal and temporal lobe volume phenotypes, respectively, after correcting for multiple statistical tests across the genome. Ridge regression gave more significant associations than univariate analysis. Two SNPs, near regulatory genomic regions, showed significant voxelwise effects in post hoc, tensor-based morphometry analyses. Genome-wide ridge regression may detect SNPs missed by univariate GWAS, by incorporating multi-SNP dependencies in the model.


