Reference Type:  Journal Article
Record Number: 2343
Author: Khondoker, M., Newhouse, S., Westman, E., Muehlboeck, J. S., Mecocci, P., Vellas, B., Tsolaki, M., Kloszewska, I., Soininen, H., Lovestone, S., Dobson, R. and Simmons, A.
Year: 2015
Title: Linking Genetics of Brain Changes to Alzheimer's Disease: Sparse Whole Genome Association Scan of Regional MRI Volumes in the ADNI and AddNeuroMed Cohorts
Journal: J Alzheimers Dis
Date: Feb 3
Short Title: Linking Genetics of Brain Changes to Alzheimer's Disease: Sparse Whole Genome Association Scan of Regional MRI Volumes in the ADNI and AddNeuroMed Cohorts
Alternate Journal: Journal of Alzheimer's disease : JAD
ISSN: 1875-8908 (Electronic)
1387-2877 (Linking)
DOI: 10.3233/JAD-142214
Accession Number: 25649652
Abstract: Background: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a highly heritable disease, but until recently few replicated genetic markers have been identified. Markers identified so far are likely to account for only a tiny fraction of the heritability of AD and many more genetic risk alleles are thought to be undiscovered. Objective: Identifying genetic markers for AD using combined analysis of genetics and brain imaging data. Methods: Imaging quantitative trait loci (iQTLs) has recently emerged as an interesting research area for linking genetics of brain changes to AD. We consider a genome-wide association scan of 109 brain-wide regional imaging phenotypes to identify genetic susceptibility loci for AD from a combined set of 1,045 subjects from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) and the AddNeuroMed studies. We use one-SNP-at-a-time as well as multi-SNP Hyperlasso based iQTL methods for the analysis. Results: We identified several novel markers associated with AD, namely HOMER2 (rs1256429; intronic, p = 8.7 x 10-10), EOMES (rs2724509; flanking), JAM2 (rs2829841; intronic), and WEE1 (rs10770042; coding). The SNP rs1256429 (HOMER2) was one of the top hits in Hyperlasso as well as in the single-SNP analysis showing an association with the volume of the right thalamus and AD, a brain region reported to be linked with AD in several studies. Conclusion: We believe that the markers identified in this study are novel additions to the existing list of genetic variants associated with AD which can be validated in future replicated studies.
Notes: Khondoker, Mizanur
Newhouse, Stephen
Westman, Eric
Muehlboeck, J-Sebastian
Mecocci, Patrizia
Vellas, Bruno
Tsolaki, Magda
Kloszewska, Iwona
Soininen, Hilkka
Lovestone, Simon
Dobson, Richard
Simmons, Andrew
ENG
2015/02/05 06:00
J Alzheimers Dis. 2015 Feb 3.
URL: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25649652
Author Address: King's College London, Institute of Psychiatry, London and NIHR Biomedical Research Centre for Mental Health, London, United Kingdom King's College London, Institute of Psychiatry, Department of Biostatistics, London, United Kingdom.
King's College London, Institute of Psychiatry, London and NIHR Biomedical Research Centre for Mental Health, London, United Kingdom Departments of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
Institute of gerontology and Geriatrics, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.
INSERM U 558, University of Toulouse, Toulouse, France.
Medical University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland.
Department of Neurology, University of Eastern Finland and Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, Finland.
Department of Psychiatry, University of Oxford, United Kingdom.
King's College London, Institute of Psychiatry, London and NIHR Biomedical Research Centre for Mental Health, London, United Kingdom NIHR Biomedical Research Unit Dementia, London, United Kingdom.


